Definitions

Explainability

Based on a synthesis of xAI and cognitive literature, this study defines explainability as “a model’s capacity to facilitate the construction of an accurate mental model (Hoffman et al., 2018) by providing information regarding the association between inputs and outcomes." It is argued that explainability is not merely a technical property of an algorithm, but a communicative act intended to bridge the "gaps in understanding" between a system and a user (Miller, 2019).

Understanding
In the literature, the concept of ‘understanding’ is more vague than that of explainability, despite definitions of explainability frequently hinging on the concept of understanding, with researchers defining explanations as ‘statements that make AI systems understandable for users’ (Adadi & Berrada, 2018; Brennen, 2020). It is important to distinguish between technical interpretability, which is the transparency of the model’s internal logic and cognitive understanding. Based on Schema Theory, understanding is defined as “the process by which a user integrates new information from an explanation into their existing knowledge structures, reaching a level of comprehension sufficient to reconstruct and communicate that logic to others" (Schmidt, 1975). It is important to make this distinction as an explanation may be technically complete but fail to promote understanding if it exceeds the user’s cognitive load or fails to align with the social requirements of a "good" explanation, such as contrastiveness and selectivity (Miller, 2019; Van Der Waa et al., 2021).

Semantic Transparency
A feature’s semantic transparency is the extent to which a feature’s name and values convey immediate, accurate meaning to a user (Lim & Dey, 2009). It is important to note that domain knowledge can moderate comprehension (Pascual & Goikoetxea, 2014). However, the scale aims to capture the feature’s intrinsic understandability. This is defined as the ’semantic baseline’: the degree to which a feature’s label is clear enough to support the initial construction of a mental model (Hoffman et al., 2018).

Measurement
Measurement is defined as the “quantification of the amount or extent of a given object or concept". Measurement is closely related to the concept of operationalisation, which involves converting an abstract construct into a measurable one by identifying a proxy measure. Going forward, abstract constructs will be referred to as concepts, while the operationalised measure will be referred to as a feature.

Outcome 
One frequently referred-to concept is the ‘outcome’ of an ML model. This is especially relevant regarding participants’ interest in accepting or changing given outcomes. In the context of this research, the outcome refers to the prediction or classification that an ML model has made during a supervised learning task based on tabular data. Referring to the loan application example, the outcome would be the granting or rejection of a loan.

Feature Understandability
The overarching aim of the scale is to quantify ’feature understandability’, defined as the degree to which users perceive that they can comprehend both what a feature means and how it may
be related to the outcome variable of a given prediction task on tabular data. Feature understandability is a feature-level construct assessed prior to model construction and is model and explanation-independent. It differs from explanation usefulness, trust and interpretability in its level of measurement (data, not explanation level) and timing (before model
construction). Understandability is user-relative and may be moderated by domain knowledge (Pascual & Goikoetxea, 2014). The scale, therefore, measures perceived understanding within a given target group, with the group-level mean scores indicating which features are likely to be understood most easily within the group. Feature understandability is, as such, not an expertise-independent property.